you articulate your Victorious and good
Thousand-Year future differently I think
that it'll I I think that it'll be up to
um a larger Collective process for this
though so I generally actually kind of
want to Outsource the decisionmaking to
the process that I trust great um and so
I think that'd be a broader more
democratic one where we can proceed
forward with AI development at a rate
that um keeps the risks very negligible
I think since the tech technology would
be so transformative if we're just
developing these um extremely powerful
AI systems over the course of decades
and we're you know continually doing out
the new technologies and medical
Innovations and things like that as a
consequence of it that seems like a much
better State than it being uh relatively
more sudden and it just sort of upending
the system um causing that sort of
instability um and inequality so
