I think yeah this is sort of like
Manhattan Project like kind of thing in
order to protect Humanity against
something that may happen never or may
happen in 10 years or in 20 years so we
need like plan a is regulation with you
know the external uh audits of
independent uh you know researchers and
so on which we don't have right now
obviously yeah uh we we need also
International coordination when we do
that because you want to make sure the
countries follow some minimal
standards and we need that because it's
not enough say for the us to have their
rules even though right now it's all
like American companies it needs to be
International and probably the next
thing it has to be us and China agreeing
on some standards but at some point it
has to be International and it has to be
a treaty that's enforced quite strongly
because there's so much a stake
