this trajectory from sort of pure
preservation of humanity at the top of
the food chain AI is a tool and nothing
more frankly never strong AI to
progression where maybe we start
tinkering into transhumanism maybe AI is
aiding us in a big way but it's very
much Still Human all the way to
Ascension which is hey let's hand the
Baton upwards and let's let potentia
continue to roll uh in in beautiful
waves towards places where where we I
don't think many people want to make
that choice so I mean go ahead I think
people will just stay ambiguous on that
as long as they as long as they possibly
can in the end people would like to have
it both ways and it may be possible to
have it both ways like it's it's not
clear there's a contradiction between
humans continuing to do their human
thing and some super AI being created
and ascending to to the infinite
