this technology would keep propagating
and expanding itself um sort of by
default and people kind of know that
this is going to happen we know it's
going to end up automating all aspects
of the economy so we know it's going to
uh end up expanding itself at the
expense of humans and um and this could
potentially you know undermine their
livelihoods it wouldn't just affect the
economic sphere it would also propagate
even to people's personal lives the
private sphere by creating you know uh
AI chat Bots that could be you know
potential partners for people um this is
a thing that would affect a large swath
of the the population ones that are
particularly lonely um so in both the
public and private sphere I imagine
we'll be in a world that's just chalk
full of AIS um all over the place and so
it would at least propagate quite a bit
