what do you think it was that made AI
something that was invisible to the
benjos the hintons and and many of the
other high level researchers in this
space yeah I mean when you are too close
to the problem you always see the
challenges right and and and and this
this happens all the time uh even you
know when you're in the startup company
when you are when you are when you're uh
when you are selling a vision versus
when you're debugging a problem you do
have to put on very different hats right
so sometimes you know when I when I tell
my co-founder like no I can't I can't do
a pitch tomorrow because I am I'm so
deep in a different brain mode yeah yeah
yeahh so it's it's it's often hard to
see that like when you are too close to
the problem you are overwhelmed by the
challenges of the problem and uh uh you
don't you don't but you know people are
capable of that stepping back but you
don't you know you don't always do that
