when digital computers were coming up
the biggest one of the biggest debates
were this idea of digital divide
remember the do you I don't know whether
you remember because back yeah yeah yeah
I do I do yeah back in my my state where
I came from this idea of digital devoid
was a big thing uh and uh but that's not
how it panned out right digital divide
did not happen like you know it was it
it was more a
widespread more widespread so uh so we
might imagine many of these things that
might not be how it turns out um so it's
a and and people might embrace it very
well you know because it solves problems
for them that problems that we have been
uh banging our head against uh forever
imagine how wonderful it would be if we
can have robots go and help after
earthquake uh yeah right it's we are
only you know there's great benefits
ahead for sure no doubt about that
exctly
