there were a lot of people interested in
making measured progress and eventually
leading to a grand postum trajectory
which I I still think can be quite a
noble Vision but there's now a subset
today that are all about um as soon as
possible no matter how little we
understand about it no matter what the
immediate risks are just pedal to the
metal and I think that that's a you know
that's a that's a position that that
some people now hold they want to rush
directly to a so here here's an
emotional response about this yeah I
I think of all the beauty that exists in
the world in the eyes and the hearts of
humans I don't want to risk
that now it you know it doesn't mean we
shouldn't work to improve the condition
of humans and improve the kind of
intelligence of what we do or you know
maybe our descendants
