deep blue you know beating Kasparov in
chess deal I mean that seemed like he
had to be a genius to play chess Soo but
nope just crunch crunch crunch crunch
crunch and in in robotics I mean both
things like big dog little dog like
these boss and Dynamics robots that can
romp all over and then seeing Sophia
robot like help people meditate and
reach some some state of bliss by
looking in their eyes and smiling with a
robot face I mean there's there's been
yeah things that have turned on light
been various other things that have made
me say like whoa this may not be AI yet
but it but it's real right but but yeah
the large language models definitely
have had that impact and then the I
think the the the third thing that gives
me personally confidence we're close got
it to AI is just my my own my own
research right like we have
