I think like Jeff Hinton said that like
there aren't many kind of examples uh of
like uh less intelligent species
controlling more more intelligent
species so like I think that should be
kind of the default expectation however
saying that that okay uh we just almost
certainly going to die now and like
there's nothing we can do I think that's
just
like like just giving up the fight
without without even trying uh which is
just also unreasonable I think that's
like very important difference between
kind of super intelligent
aliens like if you see like a like
Interstellar ship heading our way like I
think it we should be more than a little
uneasy about this uh because there's
like Civilization coming that's uh
that's more advanced than we are we
don't have inter inter Interstellar
ships yeah
