think that um like for me I'm pretty
interested either in um substantial
International coordination um uh on AI
development hopefully so that um
organizations or developers are not
feeling or countries are not feeling
like they have to race with each other
um but can proceed at a rate that is
more um cautious and where the risks are
negligible um so getting them down to
that level and uh that might look like
just simply lots of countries developing
it but then they're you know checking to
make sure that people are you know
moving uh you know at a Breakneck phas
uh or this might mean some sort of uh
global project for AI development like a
CERN for AI which I would also be um
open toward but you know we might not
get that I think the opportunity window
for that is fairly short the reason is
because at some point um probably not in
too many years um uh or not too many
years the militaries of the world will
see the um tremendous relevance for
strategic relevance for these
Technologies abut and then I think if
they're saying well the most powerful a
systems are developed in some you know
other you know some you know some lab in
Switzerland or something like that
