one of the most Pie in the Sky uh
proposals is to have like this diverse
veto committees so the rationale there
is that uh we are unfortunately in a
situation where like very few companies
and people in them are taking risks with
everyone else uh without without those
the rest of the planet really realizing
even that there there is such thing
happening that they're literally their
lives are being risked now or at least
people like s Mal are deciding like how
much risk to take with people in I don't
know Somalia and uh sure anywhere the
whole anywhere anywhere in the universe
uh so yeah in our future like go uh so
it's like first of all it's important to
just realize that this is a situation
that we're in uh and because that's just
more dignified uh to to kind of
understand that that unfortunately in a
situation where few people are making
such decisions
