Scott arenson uh the uh qu Quantum uh
physicist who now works at open AI he
also had a essay about this and uh or or
blog blog post where he said that his
foran parameter as he called it is 2%
he's willing to take like 2% risk with
his life and also the the life with of
his kids uh the the uh like do like a
biased coin flip uh with two% everyone
dies % like that's going to be a
glorious future so U I don't think it's
like unreasonable to have like this kind
of uh payoff uh but yeah but like one
big argument is that is
that can we get a better deal uh like
what if we don't have to like decide
right now what if we like uh postpone
things like for one year two years
perhaps a decade perhaps like five
decades uh perhaps the the chances of
survival would be much much much better
