even in the 1930s full 25 years after
airplanes were uh invented balloons were
more popular than airplanes as
longdistance transport for carrying
cargo carrying people yeah yeah yeah
yeah they thought Zeppelins were going
to park on the skyscrapers right exactly
exactly hilarious hilarious exactly and
and and I would say you know so this is
and and it was an exciting time there is
nothing wrong about building balloons it
was it just flyed based on different
principles compared to uh airplanes um
uh very different technology and and I
would say llms are the large language
models and Associated Foundation models
are like that in the sense that they do
solve some problems uh which are
valuable and but they solve it in a very
different way from what a future
intelligence will solve it uh and um so
if you regulate now you will be
regulating the zein
