also don't want myself or my my kids or
grandchildren to be uh you know turned
into computronium to make a new hard
drive for the for the for the super AGI
however I have extremely little faith
in existing actual real governments to
sensibly regulate AGI in a way that
we'll do more more more good than harm
like in in theory if we had a rational
Democratic truly Democratic world
government then in in indeed having the
human species regulate and guide the
growth of AGI will be a highly int
intelligent thing right given the
current actual situation I I I just
think the government getting involved is
more likely to more likely to mck things
up than to than than to help things I
mean that's just a it's a practical
practical Point rather than in principle
theoretical point
