I think it's kind of important to be
quantitative uh at this point like there
is this like very reasonable question
like so how much existential risk is
okay uh my friend Andrew grit just just
asked it on Twitter um about like how
much risk of everyone dying this decade
uh should humanity take in order to kind
of address like perennial problems of of
of that we have lived with for like for
our entire existence such as like
disease making sure that like nobody who
who doesn't want to die doesn't have to
die uh basically you would get the life
extension completely dis disease free
and kind of abundance in resources that
is like a potential like really good
world so how much cost are we would be
willing to pay for that
um uh that kind potentially glorious
future
