there are other more pernicious uh
examples like um if they are um you know
if they're Charming or hilarious or if
they imitate senss if they say ouch or
please don't turn me off or if they do
things like emulate deceased family
members you know humans be yeah
emotional connections with them and be a
lot less likely to turn them off maybe
even willing to give them things like
rights as a consequence too which would
really put a limitation on our ability
to um end up influencing so there are
many ways where nobody in particular is
to blame but we give um we become very
dependent on these systems the AI become
the solution for some of our problems um
and that means we need to end up using
more AIS so this is sort of a
self-reinforcing feedback loop um that
we're we're going down and the end state
of this is not terribly clear
