Cur Wild's extrapolation of human level
AI by 2029 still seems like a perfectly
reasonable ballark estimate to me I'm
still skeptical as I've always been of
his idea that we'll get human level AI
in 2029 and then not superhuman AI till
2045 though like I still think that he's
somehow underestimating the potential of
recursive ramp up yeah recursive self
improvement I mean if if I put my
Optimus head on and look at the work I'm
doing now with my own AGI project and
open Cog hyperon and so on I could I
could see how in theory if things go
super well we could get there in two or
three years but so that sort of thinking
is always much rougher and more dodgy
reay's extrapolation was you know
relatively rigorous as as as these
things go as you can yeah yeah yeah I
mean it's not perfect You could argue
about each point and his predictions
have not all been right but on the other
hand qu qualitatively he's clearly been
like in the right order of magnitude and
gesturing in in the right direction
