from my sort of age-based analysis I
think a consequence of that is Ascension
is going to become more and more popular
like I don't think all these people I
don't think all these people are just
going to change their view when they get
a few years older I think it's not just
that youth have higher risk tolerance
and that these people grew grew up
online like you know know Zar my son is
33 is you know I mean I remember he was
a little kid he's watching or
Transformers like this this generation
group up
watching super intelligent robots and
mind uploading and virtual reality and
so forth like it's this is sort of
programmed in their minds from from dumb
action cartoons from when they're from
when they're when they're very little so
and that so the I mean slowly then the
old conservative people die off and the
people who grew up with with you know
Digimon and Transformers baked into
their brain are going to are going to
grow up
