I think it' be possible that I'd be
either I think in the progression um
phase seems fairly reasonable and uh
either control or collaborative I I I
just don't think um um completely um
open makes quite as much sense if
they're just because I view this as like
giving everybody bioweapons giving
everybody nukes like these things yeah I
get it I get it when when the
Technologies are um this potentially
beneficial they often you know carry
with them some like potential downside
you want to mitigate the the risk of
malicious use so I think it's largely
due to malicious actors that I'd be
suspicious of like if a terrorist wants
you know a super intelligence let them
have it I I I just can't quite see that
um so I went some um basic uh um uh
oversight or control about how it's
proliferating
