it sounds like your your big Crescendo
here you know when I had asked hey
what's going to get us in that direction
of the world not shifting towards a
small organization that runs this whole
thing but towards maybe that more
decentralized vision and we haven't
talked about AGI risk and that's not
today's interview but let let's just say
it was going to be that was going to be
where the good stuff is at your real
crisp answer here is hey Dan I think
that that decentralized group would have
to be the ones that create the API that
adds the most value just like L come
about lonus tals decid you'd rather open
source it than than start a company and
keep it private right I mean for it to
happen the the group that makes the big
breakthrough to an AGI has to not want
to personally be in control of the whole
thing right so I me but but I mean the
history of Linux is one example that
shows this is within the scope of of of
human behavior right
