I think a lot of teenagers are in
Ascension in in in your D oh okay great
wow I I think the older people get the
more the more they get to I do agree
with this Ben I do agree with this
yeah but but would you yeah for you the
older so for you it's literally an age
thing it's like yeah young people today
out here really old
fol among reasonably well-educated
people who aren't religious or otherwise
ideological like people in the same sort
of culture and mental world as as as we
are yeah I think I think it's sub it's
more an age thing than than anything
else awesome take I love this it can be
empirically evaluated though yeah yeah
I'm sure we we could sample it but I
love this take it's like because I would
expect maybe you'd kind of have like oh
you know some people but you're
literally you're just articulating it as
almost being that simple
