[Music]
ancient Chinese civilization had this
concept of the Mandate of Heaven where
the emperor needed to have enough
capability and power and also enough
approval from the people in order to
keep the crown if there were enough
famines or enough losses and enough
battles uh the people might rightly
decide that the emperor lost the mandate
of Heaven at which point they can depose
him whether it be peacefully or not
peacefully and we might think about
these exact same power dynamics applying
in the domain of artificial general
intelligence we could think about this
like a quadrant on the left hand side we
have the technical ability to build AGI
this is the talent the data the
financial resources in order to compete
ardently in the field of AGI there's
only so many companies that can do that
right now but that that's one strata of
power on the other side we have support
of the public or we might think of this
as perceived benevolence and these are
the two strata that you want to optimize
for the theory here is that the company
most likely to build AGI occupies the
point closest to the top right of this
quadrant this is useful to observe
because it's interesting to have a
genuine sense of who is closest to
building the artificial deity uh but
also because the behaviors and the
incentives of players change when their
position on the board changes here's an
example plot of of what the Mandate of
Heaven might have looked like in October
of 2023 I'm not saying this is correct
this is a bit of an arbitrary plotting
here one thing I should make note about
in terms of the rules for plotting is
that that the positions are relative in
other words Whoever has the least amount
of public support is going to be
touching the left-and Border Whoever has
the most will be touching the right
Whoever has the least amount of skills
and resources will be touching the
bottom Whoever has the most will be
touching the top so someone is always
touching all four our borders this is
done not because it's indicative that
whoever is on the far right um has all
the perceived benevolence in the world
but simply that they have the most
perceived benevolence of any of the
other players on the board you don't
have to win the ultimate game of
benevolence or power in order to cross
the finish line and build AGI you simply
have to have more than the people around
you and that's exactly why uh I've drawn
out the rules like this I'll Flash the
rules on the screen a little bit if you
want to pause the video but I'm also
going to link them underneath
uh in the show note so you guys can
check that out in addition to that I'm
going to link an editable document so if
you want to plot companies in a
different way for example you know you
could think about where does Buu stand
or mistol or whoever I think plotting
five to seven is probably most
productive I don't think it makes sense
to plot the 15th or the 35th most likely
company to build AGI I think that's a
little bit useless um but if you want to
plot whoever you want to plot I'll have
an editable version that you can grab
from Google Slides uh down below so time
will tell and we'll be covering more of
the movement of the Mandate of Heaven
over time here on the trajectory but
what are some of the power dynamics we
can expect I'll give you two that are
going to be very very hard to violate in
terms of history and and most likely in
terms of uh the future trajectory of AI
number one is that it's very very hard
for everyone to like you when you have
the most power so the farther and
farther you get to the top the more
challenging it is to be touching that
right hand side uh of the quadrant it's
easy for robes Pierre to seem like a
paragon of virtue when he has no power
and simply can speak lovely fruitful
words about how he represents the people
but as he makes progress and has to Lop
off the heads of his former allies and
potential Rivals it becomes harder and
harder to maintain that image if he is
to maintain power a second Dynamic you
can expect is that new entrance will
often play to moral good at the time of
this recording we have companies like
mistol playing up the value of Open
Source as sort of the Saving Grace of AI
and keeping people away from kind of AI
tyranny they can play that moral angle
anthropic obviously spun out of open AI
as sort of a we really care about the
people sort of an angle uh and open AI
if any of you will remember uh started
off being open uh of course that is no
longer the case because it's very very
challenging to climb the heights of
power and still maintain that sort of
feigning of grand benevolence I want to
be very clear I don't think there are
any players on this game board that are
any more morally good or morally ill
than others one of the things we do here
on the trajectory is talk coldly and
frankly about incentives with no
moralizing whatsoever it is not because
companies are bad that they acquire
power and it's not that they're bad that
they play the good guy card in order to
get on the game board incentives are
just incentives and we'll see those
Dynamics play out pretty reliably here
in the months ahead I suspect those
power dynamics and speaking about them
frankly uh is the only thing that we
cover so if you're into that make sure
to check out the editable version of the
Mandate of Heaven in the show notes
Below in addition to a link to the rules
for how to plot them and feel free to
share where you think the power players
are now we're certainly going to be
covering a lot more of this in the
months ahead so thanks for tuning in
I'll catch you next
time for
