I think if we're doing this sort of you
know Cosmic analysis of the the human
race system you know intern or
Intergalactic species if we're speaking
those terms I think that the the
tradeoff schedule is fairly clear that
like you lose something like maybe a
Galaxy per year that you delay the
development of like you know super
intelligent extremely powerful systems
so we won't be able to you know access
that um and but and I normally don't
think in these Cosmic terms but you know
just sort of going play but the if if
you go extinct you know in the next two
decades you lose the entire Cosmos so
it's like Galaxy versus Cosmos so this
very strongly biases toward um taking it
at a taking a bit of a chill pill you
know how about oh three decades until
super intelligence instead of like five
years I think that that seems fairly
reasonable to me um uh uh that would
give our institutions more time to like
actually make decisions and influence
this process more prudently and have
stakeholders project their will compared
to the decisions being made up by um a
few Tech leaders
