on most other issues I'd be totally for
like open information open technology um
uh but I I will have pause with nuclear
technology or um some types of
bioengineering and I think likewise with
Advanced AIS I'm not saying with current
AIS I actually think that open sourcing
AIS right now as places like meta are
doing I don't actually have much of a
problem with that um okay uh because
this is you know although it's going to
contribute to disinformation people are
going to use it for spear fishing
attacks and you know to to trick people
for all that I think it the the uh there
are still more benefits that it's
providing than harms but later on these
Technologies move to a potentially more
catastrophic scale and then I think we
need to be a bit more careful about um
uh when people are having access to it
and adding some basic adding some basic
restrictions to them
