I would make a staunch argument that it
actually has to do with the richness and
depth of the sentience and the the
potentia of the thing so potentia in the
spinosin term is yeah the ability to
wield and to do and to to exert which
could be mental right I'm I my potentia
is imagining my future question for you
my potentia is my plan for buying food
next week my potentia is my fingernails
and my muscles my potentia is my ability
to invent things at some point new forms
of potentia emerg that never did before
at some point nothing could see delete
in in evolution there was no sight my
brother no sight and then then there was
then there was no muscle then there was
then there was no I don't know maternal
feeling than there was and so potentia
bloth and bloth and bloth and bloth and
I would say that that blooming be worthy
be worthy and that rocks don't that
rocks don't do that so
