um maybe we'd end up with nominal
control we're not actually really doing
anything we're not making any of the
effective decisions the AIS are in
effective control that's maybe the
Rosier scenario or we um end up you know
giving some of these AIS protections and
freedoms and whatnot and then we're kind
of like a second class species uh where
they're making most of the influential
decisions I suppose one uh Little Nugget
would be um imagine that there' be a new
species that just came on Earth and it's
basically they're as smart as humans and
they're going to get smarter by like 30%
a year and they can create a a child
adult or excuse me an adult Offspring in
like a minut immediately for like yeah
for like um a thousand bucks um it's
like which species do you think will be
in control of the the Earth in in 50
years time I think it's fairly obvious
the other one would
