do you think that such a pause is viable
in a collaborative International order
versus a control one some people are are
happily saying it needs to be more
control in order for us to be safe but
what is your perspective not talking
about bringing an authoritarian regime
so I don't trust authoritarian
regimes to do the right thing for the
people and in terms of AI safety but one
is the authoritarian regimes are too
obsessed with their own
survival and so their priority is is is
that rather than the well-being of the
people which is hopefully what
politicians should be elected for so
that's one reason why authoritarian
regimes are dangerous from the point of
view of the survival of humanity if we
if we get to the point where we have
very powerful AI systems smarter than us
and so on it's the wrong regime to be in
because it's not going to take the right
decisions
