like trying to take this like
libertarian Hammer uh which I'm like
otherwise would be like very sympathetic
to uh it just doesn't fit this kind of
like uh
square like the H I'm with you yeah yeah
but like and the reason very simple like
the the reason is that the destruction
is easier uh than construction yep so
like there's thing there are things
called negative externalities so like
when Facebook releases uh llama 2 which
it did uh like uh it means that like the
worst possible actor now has uh access
uh to Lama 2 uh models that are slightly
more powerful than Lama 2 because they
can improve on that uh which it's
unclear like it's kind of like in some
ways it's kind of principled and kind of
ideologically pure way of of doing
things uh but is that going to be safer
uh trajectory uh I doubt it
